#421 Implemented neural training script page (#423)
Inbibo/adonisfx_docs: docs/houdini/scripts/neural_training.md

The training script can be launched directly from Python using the `train` function in `adnml.scripts.train`, or through a command-line interface using the supported command-line arguments.

The [AdnMLTraining TOP HDA](../tools/neural_training_tool) wraps this same training process and provides a Houdini UI workflow to configure and launch training interactively.

The training script checks out an Adonis license while the training process is running. The license product depends on the execution mode. Standalone or automated training usually uses the `"batch"` license product, while DCC-driven interactive execution can use the `"interactive"` license product.

## Requirements

To run Neural Training, the AdonisML training dependencies must be installed.

Dependency installation is handled by platform-specific scripts. For information about where to find and run these scripts, refer to the [installation documentation](../../installation).

> When compatible GPU execution is available, training can use the GPU and is usually faster than CPU training. If GPU execution is not available, training falls back to CPU execution, which can be slower.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The training script automatically checks for GPU devices to accelerate the training process. If no compatible GPU is found training will fallback on CPU and be slower.

> [!NOTE]
> Multi-GPU setups are not supported, the script will automatically consume the first available device.
```

Author: Done

> The following files are required:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following arguments are required:
```

Author: Done

> - `in_filepath`: Input data `.csv` file used for training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `in_filepath`: Input data `inputs.csv` file used for training.
```

Author: Done

> - `out_filepath`: Output data `.csv` file used for training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `out_filepath`: Output data `outputs.csv` file used for training.
```

Author: Done

- `model_target_path`: Output `.adnm` model path.

The input and output data files are generated by the data extraction workflow.

> The output model path must use the `.adnm` extension.

Reviewer: Just mentioning that the script will automatically patch the extension.

Author: Done

When training with neural clusters, the following additional files are required:

- `clusters_filepath`: Neural cluster `.json` file generated by the [AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool](../tools/neural_clustering_paint_tool).
- `joint_info_filepath`: Joint information `.json` file generated during data extraction. This file should be selected from the same dataset folder as the input and output data files generated during data extraction.

> If `clusters_filepath` is provided, `joint_info_filepath` should also be provided so the training process can associate the neural clusters with the recorded joint information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `clusters_filepath` is provided, `joint_info_filepath` must also be provided so the training process can associate the neural clusters with the joints expected in the recorded dataset.
```

Author: Done

**Neural clusters.** Neural cluster data can be provided with `clusters_filepath` or `--clustersfilepath`. When neural clusters are used, the training process also requires the joint information file through `joint_info_filepath` or `--joint-info-filepath`. The neural cluster `.json` file is generated by the [AdnNeuralClusteringPaintTool](../tools/neural_clustering_paint_tool).

**Augmentation.** The `aug_protocol` argument controls which data augmentation protocol is used. The available protocols are `"none"`, `"simple"`, and `"random"`. Augmentation uses neural clusters to generate new synthetic poses from the training samples. These generated poses may contain artifacts and may be less aligned to the original simulated silhouette.

**License product.** Use `"batch"` for standalone, automated, or non-interactive training workflows. Use `"interactive"` when the training process is launched from an interactive DCC workflow and should check against an interactive Adonis license.

## How To Use

> ### Run the standalone launcher and use Python

Reviewer: Had a conversation with @carlosmonteagudoinbibo which is aligned on this.

Let's restructure in the two following sections:

# Run from DCC Python Interpreter

From the DCC instance with Adonis plugin loaded run ... snippet of code ...

# Run from Standalone Python Intepreter

Before running the script from a python interpreter of choice make sure to set the following environment variable:

`set PYTHONPATH=<path_to adn_plugin_folder>/python`

Then the command to run should be :

```
"<your_python_interpeter>/python.exe"  "<path_to adn_plugin_folder>/python/adnml/scripts/train.py" ^
  --input-data "C:/path/to/dataset/inputs.csv" ^
  --output-data "C:/path/to/dataset/outputs.csv" ^
  --modelpath "C:/path/to/output/model.adnm" ^
  --clustersfilepath "C:/path/to/clusters/neural_clusters.json" ^
  --joint-info-filepath "C:/path/to/dataset/joints.json" ^
  --aug-protocol none ^
  --standardize-out ^
  --license-product batch ^
  --force-wait
```

Author: Done

When running from a DCC Python environment where `adnml` is available, call the same `train` function directly.

<pre><code style="white-space: pre; margin: 20px 0; padding: 10px; box-sizing: border-box;">from adnml.scripts.train import train

train(
    in_filepath="path/to/dataset/inputs.csv",
    out_filepath="path/to/dataset/outputs.csv",
    model_target_path="path/to/output/model.adnm",
    standardize_out=True,
    license_product="interactive"
)
</code></pre>

For a Houdini UI workflow, use the [AdnMLTraining TOP HDA](../tools/neural_training_tool).

## Result

As a result of executing the script, the output folder will contain the trained model and the training support files:

- `<model_name>.adnm`
- `<model_name>_log.txt`
- `<model_name>_config.json`

The resulting `.adnm` file can then be used as part of the Adonis neural workflow.

The `<model_name>_log.txt` file can be used to inspect the training process. It contains epoch information, average loss, best loss, warnings, errors, and other training messages.

The `<model_name>_config.json` file can be used to review the training configuration used to produce the model.

## Recommendations

> - Use data generated by the data extraction workflow as the training input and output data.

Reviewer: This is a requirement, not a reccomendation imo

Author: Done

- Keep the input data, output data, and joint info files together in the same dataset folder.
- Use `standardize_out` or `--standardize-out` for most training runs.
- Consider disabling output standardization only when the number of training poses is low and preserving the original output distribution gives better results.

> - Use neural clusters when local deformation regions should be isolated during training.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Use neural clusters when local deformation regions should be enforced in the trained model predictions.
```

Author: Done

- Use augmentation only when the dataset is small and training without augmentation is not producing good results. If possible, recording new data should be considered first.
- Prefer GPU training when compatible hardware and dependencies are available, because it is usually faster than CPU training.
- Use `"batch"` licensing for standalone or automated training workflows, and `"interactive"` licensing for DCC-driven interactive workflows.
- Review the generated `<model_name>_log.txt` file after training to inspect epoch progress and loss values.
- Review the generated `<model_name>_config.json` file to confirm the training configuration used for the model.
- Use `force_overwrite` or `--force-overwrite` carefully, because it deletes any existing model file at the target path.

## Limitations

- Augmentation is experimental and should only be used when there is no possibility of recording more data and training without augmentation is not giving good results.

> - Augmented poses may contain artifacts and may be less aligned to the original simulated silhouette.

Reviewer: I would rephrase this one as a Reccomandation and merge them into one single entry, similar to what we have in the Training tool page

Author: Done

## Troubleshooting

If the training process fails or does not produce the expected result, check the following:

1. Check the generated `<model_name>_log.txt` file.

    The log file is generated next to the `.adnm` model and contains detailed training information, including epochs, losses, warnings, and errors.

2. Check the generated `<model_name>_config.json` file.

    The config file records the training parameters used for the run. This can help confirm that the correct input data, output data, neural cluster settings, augmentation settings, license product, and output options were used.

3. Confirm that the model path is valid.

    The output model path must use the `.adnm` extension.

4. Confirm that the input and output data paths are valid.

    The `in_filepath` and `out_filepath` arguments must point to valid `.csv` files.

5. Confirm that neural cluster paths are valid when using neural clusters.

    If `clusters_filepath` is provided, make sure `joint_info_filepath` is also provided and points to the joint information `.json` file from the extracted dataset.

> 

Reviewer: Add one entry:

6. confirm that the clusters information are defined for the same joints as the ones the dataset was extracted for.

Author: Done

> 6. Confirm that the training dependencies are installed.

Reviewer: Add another entry:

7. check the model converged during training:

* Add same description I mentioned in the training tool about checking the epochs and what to do to improve that *

Author: Done

>     If GPU execution is not available, the training process falls back to CPU execution, which can be slower.

Reviewer: Move to this one to the top. And change text to:

```suggestion
6. Confirm that the training dependencies are installed.

    Make sure to run the dependencies install prior to launching the training process. Follow ...page link... page to see how to install the dependencies.
```

It is important that this is the first one as this is something that people will have to do manually if running the script.

Author: Done

7. Confirm the license product being used.

>     Use `"batch"` for standalone or automated training workflows. Use `"interactive"` when the training process is launched from an interactive DCC workflow.

Reviewer: Not sure about this, I think we should just suggest users to make sure to use the product for which they have an active license for.

Also move as second entry.

Author: Done

> 8. Confirm that the standalone runner path is valid.

Reviewer: Remove this one please

Author: Done

> # Neural Training

Reviewer 2: I don't agree with the sections. 
To me it is weird the license product, or force wait which are arguments, are at the same level than Requirements or How To Use
The sections could be:
- requirements (dependencies are requirements)
- Arguments
    - this should explain the args for all the possible executions modes
- How To Use: 3 subsections
    - run bat and then use pyhton from there
    - run but with command line arguments
    - from DCC, use python to call `train`
- Result
- Recommendations
- Limitations
- Troubleshooting

Author: Done

> The Neural Training script is a Python script designed to run the AdonisML training process from a standalone Python entry point or from a command-line interface.

Reviewer 2: Please add IMPORTANT note about the license bundle

Author: Done

def train(
    in_filepath,                         # str: filepath to the input CSV data.
    out_filepath,                        # str: filepath to the output CSV data.
    model_target_path,                   # str: path where the trained model will be saved.
    clusters_filepath="",                # str: optional path to the neural cluster JSON file.
    joint_info_filepath="",              # str: optional path to the recorded joint info JSON file.
    aug_protocol=AugmentationProtocols.NONE, # AugmentationProtocols | str: data augmentation protocol.
    force_wait=True,                     # bool: whether to wait for input before closing the terminal.
    standardize_in=False,                # bool: whether to standardize input data.
    standardize_out=False,               # bool: whether to standardize output data.
    use_only_aug=False,                  # bool: whether to train using only augmented data.
    force_overwrite=False,               # bool: whether to overwrite the model file if it exists.
    license_product="batch"              # str: Adonis license product type.
)

> </code></pre>

Reviewer 3: If we expect users to use `AugmentationProtocols` I think we should import also that class/module.

Optional suggestion, we may want to align the comments.

Author: Done

The `train` function launches the training process using the provided training data, output model path, and optional training settings.

> [!NOTE]

> > This page describes the standalone Neural Training script and the `adnml.scripts.neural_training.train` Python entry point.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this note? does it make sense?

Author: Done

- `in_filepath`: Input data `.csv` file used for training.
- `out_filepath`: Output data `.csv` file used for training.
- `model_target_path`: Output `.adnm` model path.

The input and output data files are generated by the data extraction workflow.

The output model path must use the `.adnm` extension.

When training with neural clusters, the following additional files are required:

- `clusters_filepath`: Neural cluster `.json` file generated by an AdonisML neural clustering workflow.
- `joint_info_filepath`: Joint information `.json` file generated during data extraction. This file should be selected from the same dataset folder as the input and output data files generated during data extraction.

> [!NOTE]
> If `clusters_filepath` is provided, `joint_info_filepath` should also be provided so the training process can associate the neural clusters with the recorded joint information.

## Training Dependencies

The Neural Training script requires the AdonisML training dependencies to be installed before training can run.

To install the AdonisML training dependencies, run the dependency installation script for your platform:

> - `install_dependencies.bat` on Windows.

Reviewer 2: I think we have to:
- move this to the installation page and add a link here, or
- explain where to find those executables, and explain also the required permissions and thinks like that.

Maybe the first one is easier for now

Author: Done

| :------- | :---- | :------- | :------ | :---------- |
| `--input-data` | `-i` | Yes |  | Path to the network input `.csv` data. |
| `--output-data` | `-o` | Yes |  | Path to the network output `.csv` data. |
| `--modelpath` | `-m` | Yes |  | Path where the trained model will be saved. The output file must use the `.adnm` extension. |
| `--clustersfilepath` | `-msk` | No | `""` | Path to the neural cluster data `.json` file. |
| `--joint-info-filepath` | `-jnt` | No | `""` | Path to the recorded joint information `.json` file exported with the extracted data. |
| `--aug-protocol` | `-ap` | No | `none` | Data augmentation protocol. Available values are `"none"`, `"simple"`, and `"random"`. |
| `--standardize-in` | `-stdin` | No | `False` | Standardizes input data. |
| `--standardize-out` | `-stdout` | No | `False` | Standardizes output data. |
| `--use-only-aug` | `-oa` | No | `False` | Uses only augmented data for training. |
| `--force-overwrite` | `-fo` | No | `False` | Forces overwrite of the model file if it already exists. |
| `--license-product` | `-lp` | No | `"batch"` | Type of Adonis product license. Supported values are `"batch"` and `"interactive"`. |

> | `--force-wait` | `-fw` | No | `False` | Forces the terminal to wait for key input before closing. |

Reviewer 3: I think this section does not make sense here if we are exposing the actual .bat script below in "Command-Line example"

Author: Done

    clusters_filepath="path/to/clusters/neural_clusters.json",
    joint_info_filepath="path/to/dataset/joints.json",
    aug_protocol=AugmentationProtocols.SIMPLE,
    standardize_out=True
)
</code></pre>

7. Optionally overwrite an existing model.

    By default, training does not overwrite an existing model file.

    Enable `force_overwrite` only if the existing `.adnm` file can be safely replaced.

<pre><code style="white-space: pre; margin: 20px 0; padding: 10px; box-sizing: border-box;">from adnml.scripts.neural_training.train import train

train(
    in_filepath="path/to/dataset/inputs.csv",
    out_filepath="path/to/dataset/outputs.csv",
    model_target_path="path/to/output/model.adnm",
    standardize_out=True,
    force_overwrite=True
)
</code></pre>

## Standalone Launcher Example

The training script can also be launched without manually creating a Python environment by using the AdonisML runner script.

The AdonisML package provides a platform-specific runner:

- `run.bat` on Windows.
- `run.sh` on Linux.

The runner script is located in the AdonisML package directory. The training script is located in the `scripts/neural_training` folder next to the runner.

> On Windows, use `run.bat` followed by the path to `scripts\neural_training\train.py` and the training arguments:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
On Windows, use `run.bat` followed by the path to `scripts/neural_training/train.py` and the training arguments:
```

Apply the same for Maya.

Author: Done

# Neural Training

The Neural Training script is a Python script designed to run the AdonisML training process from a standalone Python entry point or from a command-line interface.

> [!NOTE]
> This script is DCC independent. It can be run from a standalone environment or wrapped by DCC-specific tools, as long as the required AdonisML dependencies, license, and input data are available.

> [!NOTE]

> > Neural training is only supported with the **AdonisML** bundle. Make sure the Adonis plugin is installed and licensed to support ML before running the training workflow.

Reviewer 2: Can we standardize this? I think we used "Adonis ML License" in other pages.

Author: Done

> The script trains an `.adnm` model from the input and output `.csv` files generated by the data extraction workflow. It can also use neural cluster data generated by an AdonisML neural clustering workflow to provide locality information during training.

Reviewer 2: we probably need a link to the neural cluster tool

Author: Done

The training script can be launched directly from Python using the `train` function in `adnml.scripts.train`, or through a command-line interface using the supported command-line arguments.

> DCC-specific tools may also wrap this same training process and provide UI-based workflows to configure and launch training interactively.

Reviewer 2: Not sure if we need this sentence, but if you want to keep it, I think we should add a link to the UI version of this

Author: Done

The training script checks out an Adonis license while the training process is running. The license product depends on the execution mode. Standalone or automated training usually uses the `"batch"` license product, while DCC-driven interactive execution can use the `"interactive"` license product.

The main Python function to launch training is `train`, which is defined as follows:

<pre><code style="white-space: pre; margin: 20px 0; padding: 10px; box-sizing: border-box;">from adnml.scripts.train import train

def train(
    in_filepath,                         # str: filepath to the input csv data.
    out_filepath,                        # str: filepath to the output csv data.
    model_target_path,                   # str: path where the trained model will be saved.
    clusters_filepath="",                # str: optional path to the neural cluster json file.
    joint_info_filepath="",              # str: optional path to the recorded joint info json file.

>     aug_protocol=AugmentationProtocols.NONE, # str: data augmentation protocol.

Reviewer 2: can we align the tabulation?

Author: Done

    force_wait=True,                     # bool: whether to wait for input before closing the terminal.
    standardize_in=False,                # bool: whether to standardize input data.
    standardize_out=False,               # bool: whether to standardize output data.
    use_only_aug=False,                  # bool: whether to train using only augmented data.
    force_overwrite=False,               # bool: whether to overwrite the model file if it exists.
    license_product="batch"              # str: Adonis license product type.
)
</code></pre>

The `train` function launches the training process using the provided training data, output model path, and optional training settings.

> [!NOTE]

> > This page describes the standalone Neural Training script and the `adnml.scripts.train` Python entry point.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this NOTE really. Is it necessary?

Author: Done

> ## Requirements

Reviewer 2: I think the sections and subsections are not right, can you check please?

<img width="403" height="936" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/a6fb9888-0ffb-4b77-99b3-f714759d568a" />

Author: Done

| `--joint-info-filepath` | `-jnt` | No | `""` | Path to the recorded joint information `.json` file exported with the extracted data. |
| `--aug-protocol` | `-ap` | No | `none` | Data augmentation protocol. Available values are `"none"`, `"simple"`, and `"random"`. |
| `--standardize-in` | `-stdin` | No | `False` | Standardizes input data. |
| `--standardize-out` | `-stdout` | No | `False` | Standardizes output data. |
| `--use-only-aug` | `-oa` | No | `False` | Uses only augmented data for training. |
| `--force-overwrite` | `-fo` | No | `False` | Forces overwrite of the model file if it already exists. |
| `--license-product` | `-lp` | No | `"batch"` | Type of Adonis product license. Supported values are `"batch"` and `"interactive"`. |
| `--force-wait` | `-fw` | No | `False` | Forces the terminal to wait for key input before closing. |

## How To Use

1. Install the training dependencies.

    To satisfy the requirements for GPU training, run the dependency installation script for your platform.

    On Windows, run:

<pre><code style="white-space: pre; margin: 20px 0; padding: 10px; box-sizing: border-box;">install_dependencies.bat
</code></pre>

>     On Linux, run:

Reviewer 2: <img width="1428" height="900" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/457b000c-f4c8-4288-b70e-cc28a1f03009" />

Author: Done
